Columbia introduction
Columbia is the oldest democracy in
Latin America and until recently has
enjoyed one of the continents most
buoyant economies however as previously
noted Colombia's economic and political
future is being threatened by narcotics
trafficking organizations known as
cartels general Gorman aptly
characterized the state of affairs in
Colombia today when in testimony before
the subcommittee he stated quote the
narco trafficking organizations through
bribery extortion and intimidation
became better informed and more
politically powerful than the government
end quote
while there are dozens of drug
trafficking organizations in Colombia
two cartels the Medellin and the Cali
dominate the illegal narcotics trade
they have transformed the cultivation
processing and distribution of cocaine
from a small business into a powerful
vertically integrated multinational
industry their political and economic
influence is felt not only in Colombia
but throughout Latin America what they
cannot buy they take often using violent
means to achieve their goals the
subcommittee received testimony from
several witnesses who stated that the
cartels are not driven by any ideology
but view themselves as nothing more than
businessmen they favor political
stability but in the context of a
government over which they exercise
control in Colombia democracy still
exists but many of its institutions have
been reduced to near impotency the
Colombian judicial system for instance
has been effectively neutralized as the
government has proven incapable of
arresting or prosecuting the major
traffickers much less extraditing them
to the United States in many respects
Colombia is the country that holds a key
to the future of cocaine trafficking in
this hemisphere as Colombian narcotics
trafficking is increased and the
violence and corruption in that country
have worsened
there have been differences in the US
government as to the appropriate
strategy to pursue these differences
have undermined anti-narcotics policy in
that country testifying before the
subcommittee General Paul Gorman the
former head of the u.s. Southern Command
detailed shortcomings in US narcotics
policy as it related to Colombia Gorman
made four points quote first we have
been promising the Colombians material
help since 1983 we have simply not
delivered whether that help is radars or
modern helicopters or actionable
intelligence the rhetoric of the United
States has consistently outrun its
performance second we have reached for
short-term measures in effect apply
band-aids to what is a massive social
trauma we have not sought to devise with
the Colombians a long-term comprehensive
strategy for dealing with the narco
traffickers one which would draw upon
the respective strengths of both
countries third we have failed to bring
American technology to bear either for
short-term tactical advantage or for
longer range developments which might
promise a decisive strategic defeat for
the narco traffic on TACE and for the US
has failed to engage the capabilities of
the Colombian Armed Forces in quote
gorman characterized US efforts in
dealing with the Colombians on this
problem as having been half-hearted
origins of narcotics trafficking in
Colombia during this decade Colombia has
gained the infamous reputation as the
preeminent country in Latin America
associated with cocaine trafficking
ironically however Colombia became a
center for global drug trafficking as a
result of the trade in marijuana the
cultivation of marijuana was introduced
to Colombia by Panamanian growers around
the turn of the century however
was not grown in any significant
quantities until demand in the United
States mushroomed during the 1960s by
the middle of the 1970s Columbia had
emerged as a major marijuana supplier to
the United States and by the end of the
decade had actually supplanted Mexico as
the chief source for marijuana worldwide
with the marijuana trade came to
important developments the Colombian
narcotics trade became a multi-billion
dollar industry and a criminal narcotics
infrastructure was established in both
Colombia and the United States the
subcommittee received testimony from
convicted marijuana smuggler Lee rich
that clearly Illustrated both of these
developments Lee rich began his criminal
career in 1969 by unloading bales of
marijuana from Colombian drug boats that
docked in West Florida he was 19 years
old and making between five and ten
thousand dollars only a night by the
late 1970s rich employed dozens of
people and was using his own sailboat to
smuggle marijuana valued at some forty
million dollars a shipment at the time
he was arrested in 1986 rich had a barge
ready to leave Colombia that was loaded
with more than 1 million pounds of
marijuana and valued at between 300 and
400 million dollars rich had profited
enormous Lee from the marijuana trade
but his profits never approached those
made by major Colombian criminals in the
cocaine industry coca the base for
cocaine traditionally was grown and used
by Colombian natives for generations but
was not produced for export until the
late 1960s when a small Cuban American
criminal organization in Miami began to
smuggle the drug into the United States
the cocaine was transported from
Colombia to Florida by individuals known
as mules who carried a few kilograms at
a time with their personal belongings on
commercial airlines this small scale
smuggling of cocaine into the United
States
a major enterprise in the 1970s when a
group of Colombians including Pablo
Escobar or hey Luis Oh ciao Vazquez and
Carlos later seized control of the
existing cocaine distribution networks
during a period of violent confrontation
known as the cocaine Wars the Colombians
organized their own distribution system
and began to ship cocaine in bulk to the
United States by the late 1970s they had
established criminal organizations in
both Colombia and the United States
however it was not until 1982 when faced
with a threat from Colombia's most
powerful terrorist organization the m-19
that the various Colombian cocaine
organizations banded together to form
the world's most powerful drug
trafficking organization the Medellin
Cartel origin of the cartels in 1980 the
m-19 which began as a fiercely Marxist
revolutionary and terrorist movement
inside Colombia undertook a series of
kidnappings of wealthy individuals who
were then held for ransom
two years later m-19 kidnapped a member
of the shoah family one of the leading
criminal families in Colombia in
response to the kidnapping
Jorge Ochoa the family leader called a
meeting of the drug kingpins at his
restaurant on the outskirts of Medellin
Colombia each drug kingpin who attended
the meeting reportedly contributed seven
million dollars to create an
organization called death to kidnappers
or mas which was dedicated to ending
left-wing kidnappings and extortion as
described by Milian Rodriguez the cartel
wanted to quote get rid of a threat both
politically and economically
you must remember m-19 is Marxist
Leninist
and ideology and the cartel is a
capitalist enterprise end quote the
newly formed drug trafficking
organization which
came to be called the Medellin Cartel
raised a 2000 man army and equipped it
with automatic weapons this army
subsequently engaged the revolutionaries
in a bloody war and won a decisive
victory million Rodrigues testified that
quote not only were the m-19 killed
brutally but the brutality was made
public the victims were hung up from
trees they were disemboweled with signs
on them to discourage the population
from cooperating with them end quote
when the violence subsided the
victorious cartel forged an alliance
with the defeated remnants of the m-19
as a result the m-19 had become an
enforcement mechanism for the cartel
using its soldiers to protect narcotics
shipments and intimidate the Colombian
government in return for providing these
services the m-19 receives money and
weapons from the cartel the war with
m-19 also resulted in a loose alliance
of the key leaders of the drug trade in
Colombia after the war when problems
arose for the drug industry the
individual traffickers met to work out
solutions for example one witness
described a meeting of the trafficking
organizations to discuss the problem of
extradition to the United States
according to the witness the leaders of
the drug trade discussed the possibility
of approaching officials in the US
government to negotiate the issue
cooperation among the trafficking
organizations has even been extended to
risk sharing associated with drug
shipments sent to the United States as
the International Narcotics Control
strategy report says quote shipments
appear to belong to several
organizations this avoids sending
half-empty planes or boats and more
importantly immunizes individuals in the
event of seizure it is reportedly now
possible to ensure a load against
seizure end quote as cooperation among
the Colombian drug organs
stations increased so did the production
of cocaine for example in Florida in the
spring of 1982 customs officials at
Miami International Airport discovered
3906 pounds of cocaine more than four
times the previous record seizure that
seizure despite its size did not drive
up the price of cocaine on the streets
suggesting that the flow had not been
interrupted in any meaningful way
organization and wealth the cartels
became in essence vertically integrated
businesses controlling anywhere from 60%
to 80% of all the cocaine coming into
the United States the Medellin Cartel in
particular perfected the cocaine
smuggling business into a high-tech
trade based on specialization
cooperation and mass production Escobar
was responsible for the production side
of the business
the Ochoa's handled processing and
transportation and laid air prior to his
arrest handled the distribution end
general Gorman characterized the
organization's as quote mafia like rings
capable of very large very complex
undertakings demanding significant
discipline and very tight management end
quote one witness described how the
cartel leaders are served by an array of
under bosses who handle specific
contract assignments many of the under
bosses made arrangements with North
American transportation organizations
which flew cartel drugs to the US where
the cocaine was then turned over to the
Colombian distribution network in this
country altogether law enforcement
sources estimate that the organizations
have more than 8,000 members this
complex and elaborate organization earns
an estimated eight billion dollars for
the cartels each year Forbes magazine
has listed Oh Jonah and Escobar as among
the richest men in the world
the cartels have invested these profits
and vast real estate holdings in both
Colombia and the United States the Miami
Herald described Hacienda Vetter accrues
the Ochoa family ranch in Northwest
Colombia has quote so huge it
encompasses several towns inside its
borders between modern Kia and Carta
Hanyu end quote in testimony before the
subcommittee a Miami lawyer who met
cartel members in Colombia described an
enormous ranch with many thousand head
of cattle a palatial farmhouse and
swimming pool ramon million rodriguez
who claimed to have been to the homes
and ranches of all the major cartel
members described the ranches as quote
effectively pretty self-sufficient
entities that generate their own
electricity the only thing they need is
a source of fuel everything else is
either grown or there are substantial
supplies
end quote Rodriguez testified that he
had been tasked with buying animals for
a private Zoo on one of the ranches he
said quote I have imported rhinoceros
and other weird animals that you
wouldn't believe and quote rather than
being perceived as outlaws and Outsiders
in Colombian society the drug lords
increasingly are acknowledged as the
single most powerful economic entity in
Colombia they own newspapers and
broadcasting companies and one third of
their income is invested in Colombian
industry real estate and agriculture
there is cartel involvement and over 1/2
of the Colombian soccer league cartel
leaders have passed out money to poor
farmers and supported Colombian
charities where they have not been able
to buy political influence the cartels
have resorted to violence the cartels
war against the Colombian government in
1983 the cartels established large-scale
processing facilities in the Amazon
region of Colombia at a location called
tranquil India
the facilities which were discovered and
dismantled by the Colombian authorities
in early 1984 were producing between two
and three tons of cocaine a week
astonishingly the destruction of the
tranquil India labs did little to
disrupt the cocaine trade the 1984
tranquil andia raid was a direct
Colombian government challenge to the
cartels power in the months that
followed the raid the government tried
to shut down the cartels with an
aggressive search and seizure campaign
instead of retrenching the cartels
launched an open war against the
Colombian government the cartels
employed the tactics they had used in
their war against the m-19 a highly
visible campaign of violence was
directed at prominent Colombian
officials and critics for example on
April 30th 1984 50 days after the
tranquil andia raid assassins killed
Colombian justice minister Rodriguez
Lara Bonilla in Bogota drug pilot Floyd
Carlton described in detail how the
Ochoa brothers contracted for Benitez
death quote before they killed this
Minister of Justice in Colombia there
was like a kind of blackboard where
there was a photograph of Minister
Bonilla and everyone talked about the
fact that the son of a [ __ ] that guy
had to be killed that son of a [ __ ] end
quote
the Minister of Justice is not the only
Colombian to have been brutally killed
by the cartels in 1986
Colonel Jaime Ramirez Gomez head of the
Colombia national police's
anti-narcotics Command and the man
responsible for the seizure of some 27
metric tons of cocaine during a
three-year period was assassinated he
was shot 28 times in front of his wife
and children on December 17 1986
Guillermo caas acha
the crusading anti-narcotics editor of
the Bogota Daily newspaper el espritu
doar was assassinated
his way home from work the killings were
carried out by hired organizations from
the Medellin slums yet none of the
leading cartel members have ever been
directly implicated in any of the
murders and as one US Drug Enforcement
Administration official bemoaned quote
there isn't a cop that will arrest them
there isn't a judge that will try them
there isn't a jail that will hold them
end quote
adequacy of legal and law enforcement
measures the power the cartels have
exhibited and their ability to operate
safely in Colombia raises the question
of whether the Colombian government has
the capacity to challenge seriously the
drug trade on the one hand the
casualties among Colombian law
enforcement officials judges and
government officials speak eloquently
about the sincerity of the Colombian
effort
John lon told the committee that he felt
the Colombian police and military
authorities had been quote active in the
interdiction of cocaine and marijuana as
well as cocaine essential chemical
shipments end quote at the same time the
fact that the cocaine trade has grown
steadily and size and scope and that the
cocaine organizations continue to
operate with impunity suggests that the
campaign of corruption and violence has
taken their toll on the Colombian
government the US Department of State in
its 1988 international Narcotics Control
strategy report concluded that Colombia
quote does not yet have a coordinated
strategy to combat the traffickers and
the judiciary in particular is virtually
paralyzed end quote that paralysis is
exemplified by the problems associated
with extradition of Colombian narcotics
traffickers to the United States what
the members of the cartels fear most is
extradition to the United States when
the extradition treaty between the
United States and Colombia entered into
force in 1982 the cartels reacted
swiftly
first they launched a public campaign to
have its constitutionality tested in the
courts second a terrorist unit broke
into the Colombian Supreme Court
building and murdered 11 sitting judges
the attack which occurred on November
6th 1985 at the Palace of Justice in
Bogota resulted in more than 100
fatality although the attack was
attributed to m-19 it was clearly
related to narcotics trafficking since
those involved in the assault burned all
of the files relating to pending
extradition cases the United States has
nevertheless twice tried to extradite
Jorge Ochoa from Colombia to the United
States Oh Cho was indicted for narcotics
smuggling in 1984 US Drug Enforcement
Administration officials estimate that
Achaia has moved nearly 60 tons of
cocaine into the u.s. between 1982 and
1987 the first extradition effort was
undertaken when Achaia was arrested in
Spain in 1985 on drug trafficking
charges the United States requested
extradition from Spain but a choas
lawyers persuaded the Colombian
government to file for his extradition
to his home country on the same charges
the spanish judge decided to send a Choa
to colombia where a judge released him
on short order
however the extradition request was not
pursued very aggressively by the US
government assistant US attorney Richard
Gregory complained about the Department
of State's attitude regarding the
extradition of Ochoa from Spain he
described his meeting with US embassy
officials in Madrid noting that quote I
dealt with a very nice secretary but she
was the most knowledgeable person in the
embassy as to what was going on with the
extradition here is the most significant
dope dealer in history and here is this
nice little old secretary who is the
only one who knows everything there is
to know about this guy getting
extradited
end quote Gregory went on to say the
when Attorney General Meese became
involved in the case he the Attorney
General did not request a briefing by
the federal prosecutors directly
involved in the case
in addition Meese did not debrief
federal prosecutors handling the case on
his discussions with Spanish government
officials in November 1987 Ojo was
arrested by the Columbia Police and held
in custody in Columbia on a charge of
illegally importing Bulls into the
country the US then sought to have Ochoa
extradited without relying on the
extradition treaty between the two
countries which had been declared
unconstitutional by the Colombian
Supreme Court
the Colombians repeatedly assured US
officials that they wanted to extradite
Ochoa to the United States but had to
find a legally and politically
acceptable way to do it after weeks of
frustrating discussions in which one
legal technicality after another was
raised a Colombian judge released a Choa
saying that he had served enough time in
jail on the charges for which he was
arrested the United States protested the
release and the Colombian government
began an investigation of the judge
responsible for Ochoa's release however
the damage was done and Achaia was free
again on the US side the second attempt
to extradite Achaia from Colombia was
handled at the desk and regional officer
level of the State Department for the
first several weeks the only indication
of high-level interest in the matter was
a letter from attorney general Meese to
the Colombians it was only after a cha
was released from prison that President
Reagan raised the issue directly with
the President of Colombia the only major
trafficker to have been extradited from
Colombia is carlos lehder who was
expelled in February 1987 he was
convicted on federal racketeering
charges in August of 1988 and is
currently serving a life sentence in
federal prison the State Department
attributed the later extradition to the
fact that all legal proceedings in the
case were completed
before the Colombian Supreme Court ruled
the extradition treaty was
unconstitutional throughout the drug
world however it is widely believed that
laid air was extradited because his
fellow drug dealers viewed him as a
liability and wanted him out of the
business
laterz colleagues felt he was talking
too much using cocaine heavily and that
his actions were attracting too much
public attention according to these
sources the cartels let the Colombian
government know they would not object to
his extradition the extradition problems
in Colombia have pointed up the
significant and more generic problems of
government corruption in that country
John lon DEA administrator testified
that quote individuals who cannot be
corrupted are given the option of silver
or lead and judges in Colombia are given
that particular option that is take the
money or be killed even those good
individuals in today's environment find
themselves corrupted end quote indeed
the subcommittee was told that many
Colombian officials had sold out to the
cartels for example Lee rich found the
Colombian law enforcement non-existent
quote you could load right at the dock
in certain cities where the loading
would take place you know a city or pay
terminal end quote
Floyd Carlton described how the murder
of Justice Minister Bonilla was actually
coordinated with individuals inside the
ministry quote I'm there with Jorge
Fabio Ochoa brothers both of them and
suddenly I heard a conversation in which
right apparently right from the ministry
offices of these people information was
being given to them apparently they knew
that this gentleman was going to leave
the position of ambassador and he was
going to go somewhere else
end quote conclusions the Colombian drug
cartels have succeeded at least for the
time being and securing their havens of
operations against government attempts
to crush their activities using violence
and bribery they have made it all but
impossible for the Colombian government
to arrest and prosecute them the United
States has not devoted the necessary
resources to law enforcement
intelligence gathering the cartel as
general Gorman has pointed out as better
equipment than the US Air Force general
Gorman testified that quote they use
satellite radios they have encryption
devices and voice privacy mechanisms end
quote
perhaps the most effective weapon that
the United States had against the cartel
was the extradition treaty with Colombia
extradition to the United States might
cause serious damage to the cocaine
trade but the cartels have been most
effective in preventing serious
consideration of that solution within
Colombia
moreover extraditing major narcotics
traffickers from Colombia and most other
countries may well have become further
complicated by the death penalty
provision in the 1988 omnibus drug bill
according to Assistant United States
Attorney Richard Gregory most countries
including Colombia will not extradite
one of their citizens if that individual
might face the death penalty in the
requesting country gregory testified
before the subcommittee that for this
reason he thought the death penalty was
counterproductive to bringing the drug
lords to justice there is contradictory
evidence over the amount of narcotics
assistance that the United States has
provided to Colombia the State
Department claims to have given Colombia
substantial assistance with which to
wage the war on drugs however according
to general Gorman quote we have been
promising the Colombians material help
since 1983
we simply have not delivered whether
that help is radars or modern
helicopters or actionable intelligence
the rhetoric of the United States has
consistently outrun its performance end
quote
based on testimony there are areas in
which the United States can help
Colombia fight against the cartels these
include an increase in specialized
assistance in communications and
training for anti narcotics police
general Gorman suggested that the United
States should strengthen efforts to work
with the elements of the Colombian
military and the police who have shown
that they are willing to take on the
drug traffickers finally economic
conditions in Colombia demand US
government attention the cartels
stature and power has been strengthened
by their offer to pay off the
government's 10 billion dollar external
debt and by pumping billions of dollars
into the depressed Colombian economy US
efforts could offset the cartels
position by working with members of the
Colombian government on debt relief
solutions and long term economic
development schemes as in so many
Central and South American nations
deteriorating economic conditions foster
opportunities for subversion of
democratic institutions and policies
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you